

How to Go About Food Product Development

The dynamic and complex process of food product development usually starts with a series of multi-disciplinary teams of technologists and food scientists, raw materials suppliers, nutritionists, scientific researchers, sensory specialists, quality assurance, safety managers, safety testers, quality control, risk management, regulatory affairs, and marketing executives. These teams have to work in close collaboration with each other in a bid to achieve synergies, minimize cost, extend the life of the developed product, maximize sales, and improve company reputation and performance. Merits management is one such policy that is implemented by these organizations to ensure the continuous flow of food ingredients, technology and innovation. Merits management policies are designed to mitigate the risk of supply chain interruptions, wastage and contamination, price spikes and voiding of contracts.
To ensure a successful food product development, food companies must have a sound strategy for managing their portfolio in terms of value and cost benefit. For any food company, its core activities include the manufacturing, marketing, research and development, and distribution activities. They also work towards building their own network of distributors, packers and manufacturers. To achieve maximum sales, these companies have to focus on providing efficient and effective packaging and labelling services to their customers. To ensure a successful distribution, there should be a standardized approach towards warehousing and storage of finished products to minimize transportation costs.
Recent technological advancements have brought about various changes in the way food products are packaged. Advancements in the technology of packaging help food manufacturers and suppliers to increase their profit margins significantly. Companies in the food product development sector should focus on developing cost-effective and convenient packaging solutions that are highly customized according to the company's needs. This helps them to reduce the overall cost of production, thereby improving profitability.
Apart from the physical aspects of food packaging, food processing technologies have also improved a great deal in recent times. Most processed foodstuffs have a reduced level of fat, sugar, salt and other preservatives. Processing technology has also contributed to the overall health and wellness of food products. There is an increasing demand for healthier foods especially among diet-conscious consumers. It is for this reason that food product development companies have invested a lot in improving food processing technologies.

--->
